Have you ever wondered if
your employer is keeping
a record of when you log into
company systems?
Well, they are, if they're implementing
the third and final function
of the authentication,
authorization, and
accounting framework.
Accounting is the practice of
monitoring the access
logs of a system.
These logs contain
information like who
accessed the system, and
when they accessed it,
and what resources they used.
Security analysts use
access logs a lot.
The data they contain
is a helpful way to
identify trends, like
failed login attempts.
They're also used to uncover
hackers who have
gained access to
a system, and for
detecting an incident,
like a data breach.
In this field, access
logs are essential.
Oftentimes, analyzing them is
the first procedure
you'll follow
when investigating
a security event.
So, how do access logs compile
all this useful information?
Let's examine this more closely.
Anytime a user
accesses a system,
they initiate what's
called a session.
A session is a sequence
of network HTTP
basic auth requests and
responses associated
with the same user,
like when you visit a website.
Access logs are essentially
records of sessions that
capture the moment a user enters
a system until the
moment they leave it.
Two actions are triggered
when the session begins.
The first is the creation
of a session ID.
A session ID is a unique
token that identifies
a user and their device
while accessing the system.
Session IDs are attached
to the user until
they either close their browser
or the session times out.
The second action that takes
place at the start
of a session is
an exchange of session cookies
between a server
and a user's device.
A session cookie is a
token that websites use to
validate a session
and determine how
long that session should last.
When cookies are exchanged
between your computer
and a server,
your session ID is
read to determine
what information the
website should show you.
Cookies make web sessions
safer and more efficient.
The exchange of tokens means that
no sensitive information, like
usernames and
passwords, are shared.
Session cookies
prevent attackers
from obtaining sensitive data.
However, there's other
damage that they can do.
With a stolen cookie,
an attacker can impersonate
a user using their
session token.
This kind of attack is known
as session hijacking.
Session hijacking
is an event when
attackers obtain a legitimate
user's session ID.
During these kinds of attacks,
cyber criminals
impersonate the user,
causing all sorts of harm.
Money or private
data can be stolen.
If, for example,
hijackers obtain
a single sign-on
credential from stolen cookies,
they can even gain access to
additional systems that
otherwise seem secure.
This is one reason
why accounting and
monitoring session
logs is so important.
Unusual activity on access
logs can be an indication that
information has been
improperly accessed or stolen.
At the end of the day,
accounting is how we gain
valuable insight that
makes information safer.